+++
hook = "TODO"
location = "San Francisco"
published_at = 2019-05-27T21:40:12Z
title = "Sequences in the Independent Web"
+++

I'm visiting Berlin in a few weeks, and am booting a side
project.

Many of us in technology-adjacent circles have bemoaned the
continued centralization of the web. Although we've seen a
little bit of a backlash more recently, the overwhelming
trend for years now has been for content to gravitate
towards the Great Walled Gardens of the web -- Facebook,
YouTube, Twitter, and the like. As time marches on, not
only are those gardens getting bigger, but their walls
appear to be getting higher. In the past at least some
motions were made towards attempted interoperability (see
XMPP on Google Hangouts or Facebook Messenger for example),
these days openness on the part of a major player is a
quixotic dream of a more idealistic past.

Maybe the even darker element in play is that you can't
just blame the walled gardens -- this seems to be a
direction that most people are happy to go. There's good
evidence that these companies employee dark patterns in
various forms to encourage more engagement and to keep
users on their sites longer, but given the choice between a
turnkey solution from a billion dollar leviathan, or the
(admittedly) somewhat bumpy path of the independent web,
most people will opt for the former every time. Not only is
is easier, but its network effects provide tremendous
value.

## Sequences (#sequences)

Even so, to those of us who grew up in the era of Geocities
and Angelfire, it's a little unsatisfying. There was a time
when it felt like the online community was in a constant
state of pushing the boundaries of what could be expected
online, and was willing to work to do so. That meant
learning technical skills -- HTML, CSS, basic system
administration, Flash (not every idea was a good one), but
also non-technical ones -- like how to string together more
than a few hundred characters of prose to try and build a
compelling piece of writing.

If we ever wanted to bring a period like that back, we'd
need to change a few things. Part of the puzzle would be
figuring out how to lower the barrier to entry so that
technical and non-technical users alike could participate,
but a prerequisite to that would be making people want to
leave the walled garden in the first place.

!fig src="/assets/images/sequences-project/sample.png" caption="A sequences sample page: a large vista with some text accompaniment. All independent."

