---
title: "False positives in UI design: Why small buttons can
  be better than big"
published_at: 2019-02-14T19:38:40Z
hook: TODO
---

The iPhone X is a near perfectly designed device, but it
has one glaring design flaw that I brush up against again
and again: its buttons are too big.

TODO: image of iPhone X buttons

At first glance big buttons might strike you initially as a
feature, and when you first start using a device, they are.
Bigger means easier to find, both by visual inspection, and
also by feel. Bigger is discoverable. Bigger puts these
features within easy reach.

But as a user progresses along the learning curve, what was
initially good becomes bad. You find yourself activating
the phone, changing volume, and taking screenshots
constantly, all by accident. Bigger means that the
probability that you're going to hit them when you didn't
intend to goes *way* up. They get frequent legitimate use
of course, but see a huge number of false positives.

Compare that to the iPhone's golden age as far as buttons
were concerned: the iPhone 4 (or later SE). Volume buttons
were small, circular, and stiff -- absolutely perfect for a
feature that you're going to use at maximum a few times an
hour. The on/off button is a little bigger, but also
smaller and stiff. Despite all their reduced size, after
just a few days getting used to the device, fingers learn
to find any of them by feel.

TODO: image of iPhone 4

The HomePod is the apex of false positive design. If you
touch it anywhere on its top surface, it'll start playing
random music of its own selection. I can honestly say that
although I've activated this feature hundreds of time, I've
never *once* done it on purpose. The interface's false
positive rate for me is 100%.

TODO: image of HomePod

Bigger buttons may be initially more user friendly, but
over the lifetime of ownership, think about where on the
sophistication curve users are going to spend most of their
time. Those big buttons help for the first few days, but
for the next few *years*, they're a liability.

Small buttons on take a little longer to get used to, but
users get the feel for them fast. After a little
acclimatization they're still easy to find by touch, and
accidental use is a tiny fraction of what their larger
brethren see. If there's just one iPhone feature that I'd
love to see make a comeback, it's this one.
