+++
hook = "A short rationale on why I stopped responding to emails from technical recruiters."
published_at = 2019-03-16T20:06:34Z
title = "Tech recruiters, or, when software compromises courtesy"
+++

I used to respond to every single email from a technical
recruiter that I ever got. Those of us in software are
going through a lucky period right now where engineers are
in high demand, but I still remember the times when it was
hard to find a job. Someone interested in hiring me has
always been extremely flattering, and common courtesy
dictated a reply, even if it was one along the lines of
"sorry, I'm not interested right now."

But at some point (my estimate is about five years ago),
the ethics of the profession took a sudden, hard turn to
the south. Signs became apparent that emails were no longer
sent by hand, but rather by automated mass-mailing systems.
Some of them were obvious like the occasional failed
template render (`"Hi ${firstName}! I noticed that you
worked at ${lastCompany} and are interested in ${topic}
..."`). Others were less so, like that subsequent follow
ups would have a noticeable schedule that could be timed to
the minute (second email three days later, third email at
one week, fourth at two weeks). Just like the spam that was
ubiquitous before Gmail [1], there was never an opt in,
never a disclaimer as to the automated nature of the
message, and never an unsubscribe link.

Beyond that, I started to notice that my personal
information was being shared around in the same system(s)
responsible for sending these messages. I have multiple
email addresses, and if I received an email to one and
replied to it from another, the next time I got a
robo-email from a recruiter it would be from the more
up-to-date email, even if they were from a completely
different organization.

Ever since, the robo-software has been getting more
sophisticated, and goes out of its way to disguise itself.
Incriminating headers are scrubbed from the final emails,
schedules are given random jitter to cloak their
regularity, and tracking pixels are embedded to track
whether a recipient opened the email even if they didn't
reply.

New techniques were introduced. Recruiters were finding
that emails from themselves were too frequently being
ignored, so they'd start conversations with prospects from
a company executive like the CEO or CTO to increase the
perceived impact of that initial hook. After a brief
exchange with the sender, the candidate is presumably
handed back to a recruiter for follow up.

Personally, I find all of this to be highly ethically
dubious. I doubt recruiters think of it that way, but even
in the most charitable interpretation is that they're
saving their own time by automatically carpet bombing
thousands of potential candidates, at the cost of mine.
My stance has shifted from replying to *every* recruiting
email I received to replying to *none of them* because
these shenanigans are so widespread that it's safe to
assume they're in play. I've been tempted to take it even a
step further by not even opening the emails before
archiving them, just to avoid triggering the tracking
pixels. I find this all a little unfortunate because it's
likely that the occasional high quality (and human-written)
opportunity falls through the cracks.

[1] Gmail, but also possibly some tighter legislation like
CAN-SPAM.
