---
title: "False positives in UI design: when small buttons
    are better than big ones"
published_at: 2019-04-27T16:40:42Z
image: /assets/fragments/false-positives/vista.jpg
hook: Why smaller buttons on phones produce a better
  lifetime experience, even if their learning curve is a
  little more challenging.
---

The iPhone X is a near perfectly designed device. I've
owned mine a year and a half now, and I'd be hard pressed
to articulate more than a couple complaints. But there is
one problem (filed under the very first of First World
problems) that gets to me again and again: its buttons are
too big. _Way_ too big.

See if this sounds familiar: you're holding the phone in
landscape intending to take a photo, your forefinger
resting on the volume up button to use it as a shutter. As
you press it, you accidentally put pressure on your thumb
resting on the phone's power button, which is so big that
there's no way for your thumb _not_ to be resting on it.
The screen turns off. You turn it back on and start over.

![The iPhone XR's huge buttons.](/assets/fragments/false-positives/iphone-xr.png)

At first glance big buttons might strike you as a feature,
and when you first start using a device, they are. Bigger
is discoverable: buttons are easier to find, both by visual
inspection, and by feel. Bigger is accessible: buttons are
easier to press for people with less tactile precision.
Bigger buttons put features within easy reach.

But as users progress along the learning curve and get more
familiar with their device, what was initially good becomes
bad. Unintentional actions start to manifest: activating
the screen, changing the volume, taking screenshots --
they're small problems, and only occur at a background
ambient level, but they don't go away. The bigger buttons
make intentional actions easier, but also introduce a rate
of false positives way above the baseline.

And it's not just an iPhone problem -- the HomePod (as
another example) is the true apex of false positive design.
Touching its top surface will prompt it to play random
music. I've activated this feature dozens of times, not
once on purpose. One day I came home to find mine blaring
away, apparently of its own volition. I was just getting my
exorcism gear out of storage when I noticed something on
top of it. A dead flower -- weighing only a few grams --
had fallen off a nearby orchid, landed on top of the
HomePod, and activated it (see photo above).

## More challenging beginning, better lifetime experience (#lifetime)

Apple didn't always get this wrong, the iPhone 4 (and later
SE) were a golden era as far as buttons were concerned.
Volume buttons were small, circular, and stiff --
absolutely perfect for a feature that's never going to be
used more than a few times per hour. The on/off button is a
little bigger, but also small and stiff. Despite the
reduced size, after just a few days getting used to the
device, all of them are easy to find by feel.

![The iPhone 4's small buttons.](/assets/fragments/false-positives/iphone-4.png)

Bigger buttons may be initially more user friendly, but
over the lifetime of ownership, think about where on the
sophistication curve users are going to spend most of their
time. Those big buttons help for the first few days, but
are a liability for the next few ***years***.

Small buttons take longer to get used to, but users get a
feel for them fast. After a little acclimatization they're
still easy to find by touch, and accidental use practically
disappears. Our smartphones are already gratifyingly fast,
thin, and beautiful -- if there's one killer feature I'd
love to see in a new phone, it's this one.
