---
title: Karl Lagerfeld (and Dieting)
published_at: 2019-02-20T15:02:57Z
hook: A few notes on the passing of a fascinating cultural
  contributor and his even more fascinating approach to
  weight loss.
---

[Karl Lagerfeld][wiki] passed away yesterday, a designer
best known for his long-held position of creative director
of Chanel.

This [personality piece][newyorker] on him from the New
Yorker was a fascinating read, showing that some cults of
personality are true-to-form and really just as
idiosyncratic as you'd expect them to be.

The notes on his weight loss are interesting. Back around
2000, Lagerfeld remade himself from quite overweight to
quite thin, losing ninety-two pounds in a year's time.
Afterwards, he co-wrote a book with his physician on the
techniques he employed called _Diet_. It's unavailable now,
but Amazon reviews are pretty suggestive to the fact that
it's largely just a blend of well-known dieting advice with
a recipe book.

What makes his advice a little unusual is that he admits to
extremes. His baseline wisdom is to cut caloric input, but
he goes a little further to suggest not eating around sleep
(between 8 PM and 8 AM), and claimed separately: "I eat
next to nothing."

I found myself empathizing with Lagerfeld on these points.
Even with a fair bit of day-to-day activity, my body's
default setting is a "healthy" amount of overweight.
Thinning out is possible, but involves a strict combination
of heavy exercise, caloric restriction, and near total
elimination of snack foods and desserts. Of course people's
mileage in this area varies a lot -- my theory is that my
genetics are still optimized for cold northern climates
where keeping a few extra pounds of fat around might be the
difference in making it through winter.

Lagerfeld seems to have kept the weight off, so he
apparently developed the discipline to keep his system
working. Aside from a trim physique, there was a lot to
admire about his immense productivity, passion, variety of
creative output, personal philosophy, and aptitude for
eliminating distraction from his life. The world's lost an
interesting soul.

[newyorker]: https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2007/03/19/in-the-now
[wiki]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karl_Lagerfeld
